dm: add doc for continuous data validation (#9793)
pingcap/docs: dm/dm-continuous-data-validation.md

---

> title: Continuous Data Validation in DM

Reviewer: 增量数据一般用 incremental data 吧？

Author: 这里 @buchuitoudegou 在中文文档的文件名里用了 continuous，感觉是想表达“持续”的意思？

Reviewer 2: 一直都是这个名字，从 spec 开始就是 continuous，/cc @sunzhaoyang

In incremental migration scenarios, you can use the continuous data validation feature in DM. This feature ensures data integrity and consistency during incremental migration where data is continuously written into the downstream.

## Enable continuous data validation

You can enable continuous data validation using either of the following methods:

- Enable in the task configuration file.
- Enable using dmctl.

### Method 1: Enable in the task configuration file

To enable continuous data validation, add the following configuration items to the task configuration file:

```yaml
# Add the following configuration items to the upstream database that needs to be validated:
mysql-instances:
  - source-id: "mysql1"
    block-allow-list: "bw-rule-1"
    validator-config-name: "global"
validators:
  global:
    mode: full # "fast" is also allowed. "none" is the default mode, which means no validation is performed.
    worker-count: 4 # The number of validation workers in the background. The default value is 4.
    row-error-delay: 30m # If a row is not validated within the specified time, it will be marked as an error row. The default value is 30m, which means 30 minutes.
```

> The configuration item are described as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration items are described as follows:
```

      --start-time string   specify the start time of binlog for validation, e.g. '2021-10-21 00:01:00' or 2021-10-21T00:01:00
```

* `--mode`: specify the validation mode. The possible values are `fast` and `full`.
* `--start-time`: specify the start time for validation. The format follows `2021-10-21 00:01:00` or `2021-10-21T00:01:00`.
* `task`: specify the name of the task to enable continuous validation for. You can use `--all-task` to enable validation for all tasks.

For example:

```shell
dmctl --master-addr=127.0.0.1:8261 validation start --start-time 2021-10-21T00:01:00 --mode full my_dm_task
```

## Use continuous data validation

When you use continuous data validation, you can use dmctl to view the status of the validation and to handle the error rows. "Error rows" refers to the rows that are found to be inconsistent between the upstream and downstream databases.

### View the validation status

You can view the validation status using either of the following methods:

Method 1: run the `dmctl query-status <task-name>` command. If continuous data validation is enabled, the validation result is displayed in the `validation` field of each subtask. Example output:

> ```json

Reviewer 2: I remember that JSON doesn't allow comments in its body. It seems the comments is corruptively rendered with unexpected red background😥 

Maybe try JS instead.

Author: The comments look good on our website. We might blame the rendering on GitHub. 😉 
<img width="827" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/59654584/183824560-a832d79d-be7a-42c8-817a-2d49e870f150.png">
https://netlify--preview-docs.netlify.app/zh/tidb/dev/dm-continuous-data-validation

```
Usage:
  dmctl validation show-error [--error error-state] <task-name> [flags]

Flags:
      --error string   filtering type of error: all, ignored, or unprocessed (default "unprocessed")
  -h, --help           help for show-error
```

Example output:

```json
{
    "result": true,
    "msg": "",
    "error": [
        {
            "id": "1", // Error row id, which will be used in processing error rows
            "source": "mysql-replica-01", // Source id
            "srcTable": "`validator_basic`.`test`", // Source table of the error row
            "srcData": "[0, 0]", // Data of the error row in the source table
            "dstTable": "`validator_basic`.`test`", // Target table of the error row
            "dstData": "[]", // Data of the error row in the target table
            "errorType": "Expected rows not exist", // Error type
            "status": "NewErr", // Error status
            "time": "2022-07-04 13:33:02", // Discovery time of the error row
            "message": "" // Additional information
        }
    ]
}
```

### Handle error rows

After continuous data validation returns error rows, you need to manually handle the error rows.

> When continuous data validation finds error rows, the validation does not stop immediately. Instead, it records the error rows for you to handle. Before the error rows are processed, the default status is `unprocessed`. If you manually correct the error rows in the downstream, the validation does not automatically retrieve the corrected data. The error rows are still recorded in the `error` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When continuous data validation finds error rows, the validation does not stop immediately. Instead, it records the error rows for you to handle. Before the error rows are processed, the default status is `unprocessed`. If you manually correct the error rows in the downstream, the validation does not automatically retrieve the latest status of the corrected data. The error rows are still recorded in the `error` field.
```

> If you do not want to see an error row in the validation status, or if you want to mark an error row as resolved, you can locate the error row id using the `validation show-error` command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you do not want to see an error row in the validation status, or if you want to mark an error row as resolved, you can locate the error row id using the `validation show-error` command and subsequently handle it with the given error id:
```

    - If the event has been processed by the syncer, the validator moves on to the following steps.
2. The validator parses the binlog event and filters out the rows based on the block and allow lists, the table filters, and table routing. After that, the validator submits the changed rows to the validation worker that runs in the background.
3. The validation worker merges the changed rows that affect the same table and the same primary key to avoid validating "expired" data. The changed rows are cached in memory.
4. When the validation worker has accumulated a certain number of changed rows or when a certain time interval is passed, the validation worker queries the downstream database using the primary keys to get the current data and compares it with the changed rows.
5. The validation worker performs the data validation. If the validation mode is `full`, the validation worker compares data of the changed rows with data of the downstream database. if the validation mode is `fast`, the validation worker only checks the existence of the changed rows.

>     - If the validation succeeds, the changed row is removed from the memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - If the changed rows pass the validation, the changed row is removed from the memory.
```
"validation succeeds" sounds a bit elliptical or ambiguous, and sounds more likely to be a validation procedure without encountering hitches.

>     - If the validation fails, the validator does not report an error immediately but waits for a certain time interval before validating the row again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - If the changed rows fail the validation, the validator does not report an error immediately but waits for a certain time interval before validating the row again.
```
ditto

>     - If a row has not been validated successfully for a long time (specified by the user), the validator marks the row as an error row and writes it to the meta database in the downstream. You can view the information of error rows by querying the migration task. For details, refer to [View the validation status](#view-the-validation-status) and [Handle error rows](#handle-error-rows).

Reviewer 2: ditto

Author: ```suggestion
    - If the changed rows fail the validation for a long time (specified by the user), the validator marks the row as an error row and writes it to the meta database in the downstream. You can view the information of error rows by querying the migration task. For details, refer to [View the validation status](#view-the-validation-status) and [Handle error rows](#handle-error-rows).
```

Reviewer 2: lgtm

## Limitations

> - The source table to be validated must have a primary key or a unique key with the not null constraint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The source table to be validated must have a primary key or a not-null unique key.
```
